---
title: "Session 1"
menuTitle: "S1"
weight: 1
---

## Table of contents
- [Table of contents](#table-of-contents)
- [Template program](#template-program)
- [Arithmetic and logic operations](#arithmetic-and-logic-operations)
- [Memory operations](#memory-operations)
- [Application: Turn on/off a LED](#application-turn-onoff-a-led)
- [Jump and conditionnal branch operations](#jump-and-conditionnal-branch-operations)

## Template program




```asm
#include "main.h"

.globl _start
_start:

_end:
  j _end
```

## Arithmetic and logic operations

```asm
_start:
  addi x4, x0, 1
```

{{% notice style="blue" title="Question 1" icon="question"%}}
Adds the preceding instruction in your *main.S* file and run a simulation.
What does this instruction do ?
{{% /notice %}}

{{% notice style="green" title="Answer 1" icon="reply"%}}
**addi x4, zero, 1** is the RISC-V instruction for *register-immediate addition*.
An immediate is a value directly encoded in the instruction.
Here, the operation adds the immediate value **1** to the value in the register **zero**, and stores the result in **x4**.
{{% /notice %}}

Add a new addition instruction following the previous one.
Change the destination register and the added value.

{{% notice style="blue" title="Question 2" icon="question"%}}
For both instructions, at what cycle is the result visible in the destination register ?
Considering it is the beginning of our program, is it normal ?
Using the information given on the microarchitecture of the processor, explain this result.
{{% /notice %}}

{{% notice style="green" title="Answer 2" icon="reply"%}}
The first result is visible during the 6th cycle.
The second result is visible during the 7th cycle.
The observed latency for the first instruction is due to the processor pipeline: the instruction must pass through 6 stages before its result is validated.
It is explained
{{% /notice %}}

Addition are not the only type of arithmetic and logic operations available in the RISC-V ISA.
Basically, there is also instructions for boolean OR, AND or XOR, to perform shifts or comparisons.
All of them are described in the *Chapter 2 RV32I* of the RISC-V specification, in the section *Integer Computational Instructions*.

{{% notice style="blue" title="Question 3" icon="question"%}}
Most of the arithmetic and logic instructions have two variants (*e.g.* *addi* and *add*).
Explain what is the difference between them.
{{% /notice %}}

{{% notice style="green" title="Answer 3" icon="reply"%}}
Instructions with suffix *-i* are for *register-immediate* operations.
They combine a register value with an immediate.
The other instructions are for *register-register* operations.
They combine two register values.
{{% /notice %}}

## Memory operations

Previous arithmetic and logic instructions allow to perform operation only between registers or with an immediate.
However, an important part of the system is the memory.
It is where are stored most of the system informations.
Moreover, access to peripherals and I/Os are often implemented has particular memory ranges.

In the RISC-V ISA, dedicated instructions are used to perform memory operations.
In the base instruction set, they are two kinds of memory instructions:
- *load* to transfer a data from memory to a register,
- *store* to transfer a data from a register to memory.

For both, an address value is used to indicate which memory part we target.
In our case, some of the needed address are indicated in the *src/main.h* file.
For example, we have the addresses for GPIOA, GPIOB or memory-mapped registers (register readable/writable with memory operations).
Using the pseudo-instruction *li*, it is possible to directly write a value (*e.g* an address) in a register:
```asm
li x4, ADDR_MEM_REG_0 # Write the value ADDR_MEM_REG_0 in x4
                      # Here ADDR_MEM_REG_0 = 0x1c004000
```
A pseudo-instruction is an alias created by the compiler.
It allows to simplify the programmer work by providing more operations.
Then, the compiler translates it it in real assembly instructions.

{{% notice style="blue" title="Question 4" icon="question"%}}
The disassembled program is available after compilation in *build/main.list*.
It is a translation of the binary into an assembly program.
Open this file with a text editor and explain how the compiler simply implements the *li x4, ADDR_MEM_REG_0* pseudo-instruction.
{{% /notice %}}

{{% notice style="green" title="Answer 4" icon="reply"%}}
A simple *addi* instruction can only consider a signed immediate value of 12 bits = -2048 to 2047.
The value ADDR_MEM_REG_0 (0x10000200) is out of this range.
Then, it is combined with another instruction called *lui* (for *load upper immediate*) allowing to write a large number.

```asm
lui	x4, 0x10000   # x4 = 0x10000000
addi x4, x4, 512  # x4 = 0x10000000 + 0x200 = 0x10000200
```
{{% /notice %}}

{{% notice style="blue" title="Question 5.a" icon="question"%}}
Using a store operation *sw*, try to modify the value in the memory-mapped register 0.
{{% /notice %}}

{{% notice style="green" title="Answer 5.a" icon="reply"%}}
```asm
li x4, ADDR_MEM_REG_0
li x5, 0xa
sw x5, 0(x4)
```
{{% /notice %}}

{{% notice style="blue" title="Question 5.b" icon="question"%}}
Using a load operation *lw*, try to read back the value in the memory-mapped register 0. 
{{% /notice %}}

{{% notice style="green" title="Answer 5.b" icon="reply"%}}
```asm
li x4, ADDR_MEM_REG_0
lw x6, 0(x4)
```
{{% /notice %}}

{{% notice style="blue" title="Question 6" icon="question"%}}
Using only one more instruction, try now to modify the memory-mapped register 2.
{{% /notice %}}

{{% notice style="green" title="Answer 6" icon="reply"%}}
Only use the value in a register as memory address is called indirect addressing.
RISC-V memory operations also allows indirect indexed memory access: a constant value is added to the address register value to create the final address.
Here, the address of the memory-mapped register 2 is ADDR_MEM_REG_0 + 8.
Then, considering the address ADDR_MEM_REG_0 is already in x4:

```asm
sw x5, 8(x4)
```
{{% /notice %}}

## Application: Turn on/off a LED

All the previous instructions are sufficient to control a LED status.
Using them, our goal will be now to turn on then turn off the signal controlling the LED 0.

{{< fig 
  fig="/fig/crs/riscv-asm/mem-gpioa.png"
  alt="GPIO A memory mapping" 
  width=400px   
  x="1"
  caption="Description of the GPIO A memory mapping."
  subcaption=""
>}}

The Figure 1 describes the memory-ampped registers used to control the GPIO A status.
*GPIOA eno* indicates bit by bit the direction of each I/Os: 0 for input, 1 for output.
*GPIOA reg* indicates bit by bit the value of each I/O.
*GPIOA set* allows to set particular bits of the *GPIOA reg* value: only written 1 are considered.
*GPIOA reset* allows to reset particular bits of the *GPIOA reg* value: only written 1 are considered.

{{% notice style="blue" title="Question 7" icon="question"%}}
Set the value of LED 0 during some cycles before reset it.
{{% /notice %}}

{{% notice style="blue" title="Question 8" icon="question"%}}
Make sure that your program does not modify the other bits of GPIO A.
What are the two different strategies to do this ?
{{% /notice %}}

{{% notice style="green" title="Answer 7 & 8" icon="reply"%}}
First solution using set and reset registers:
```asm
li x4, ADDR_GPIOA   # Writes the address of GPIOA
lw x5, 0(x4)        # Loads the current value of eno
li x6, (1 << LED0)  # Create a mask for LED 0
or x5, x6, x5       # Apply the mask to the value
sw x5, 0(x4)        # Store the new eno value

sw x6, 8(x4)        # Set the LED 0 bit

nop                 # No-operation
nop                 # No-operation

sw x6, 12(x4)       # Reset the LED 0 bit
```
Second solution applying a mask to the value:
```asm
li x4, ADDR_GPIOA   # Writes the address of GPIOA
lw x5, 0(x4)        # Loads the current value of eno
li x6, (1 << LED0)  # Create a mask for LED 0
or x5, x6, x5       # Apply the mask to the value
sw x5, 0(x4)        # Store the new eno value

lw x5, 4(x4)        # Loads the current value of reg
or x5, x6, x5       # Apply the mask
sw x5, 4(x4)        # Write the new reg value

nop                 # No-operation
nop                 # No-operation

lw x5, 4(x4)        # Loads the current value of reg
li x7, 0xffffffff   # Writes -1 to revert the mask
xor x7, x7, x6      # Revert the mask
and x5, x5, x7      # Apply the mask
sw x5, 4(x4)        # Write the new reg value
```
{{% /notice %}}


## Jump and conditionnal branch operations
forward
how to load the value 0xffffffff in a register ?